chore(rfc): helm synthesis (#1237)
cdk8s-team/cdk8s: rfc/helm-synthesis.md

# Helm Synthesis

* **Original Author(s):** @vinayak-kukreja
* **Tracking Issue:** https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s/issues/1251
* **API Bar Raiser:** @iliapolo

Users can now synthesize a cdk8s application into a helm chart. This will make it easier for them to deploy cdk8s applications using helm.

---

## Working Backwards
### README

You can synthesize your cdk8s application into a Helm chart, that can be directly passed to helm. This allows you to deploy cdk8s applications with Helm. To do so, pass `--format helm` and `--chart-version` for the version you would like to set for the chart to the synthesis command. 

```
cdk8s synth --format helm --chart-version 1.0.0
```

Execution of prior command would create a helm chart directory structure:
```

> chart/              

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dist/              
```

├── Chart.yaml      
├── Readme.md      
└── templates/      
└── crds/           
```

The synthesized manifests of the cdk8s app would be present in the `templates` folder and, your chart's `Chart.yaml` would be:
```
apiVersion: v2                        

> name: <app-directory-name>                                 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
name: <cdk8s-app-directory-name>                                 
```

version: 1.0.0                             

> description: Generated chart for <app-directory-name>  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Generated chart for <cdk8s-app-directory-name>  
```

---

> Ticking the box below indicates that the public API of this RFC has been signed-off by the API bar raiser (the `api-approved` label was applied to the RFC pull request):

```
[ ] Signed-off by API Bar Raiser @iliapolo
```

---

## Public FAQ

### What are we launching today?

We have added a new option to `cdk8s synth` command that allows users to synthesize their apps into helm charts.

### Why should I use this feature?

You should use this feature if you'd like to deploy your cdk8s application using Helm.

---

## Internal FAQ

### Why are we doing this?

Helm is a powerful package manager for Kubernetes and is also popular among developers as a deployment tool. It eases the process of deploying to Kubernetes cluster for its users.

Currently, a cdk8s application produces a directory of pure Kubernetes manifests. Deploying those manifests using helm requires user intervention because helm expect a different directory structure, with custom metadata files.

> Now, with the implementation of this feature, the user can run,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the implementation of this feature, the user would be able to run:
```

```

> cdk8s synth --format helm --chart-api-version v2 --chart-version 1.0.0 && helm install <release-name> ./dist

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cdk8s synth --format helm --chart-version 1.0.0 && helm install <release-name> ./dist
```

```
This will create a helm chart containing the generated manifests and deploy them to the Kubernetes cluster via helm. Also note that until now, they only way to **easily** deploy the output of `cdk8s synth` was using `kubectl apply`, which is less common in production workloads. This feature opens the door for robust and easy deployment of cdk8s applications in a production environment. 

### Why should we _not_ do this?

> Customers are not currently blocked for deploying to helm with our synthesized manifests. They would need to create the appropriate helm chart folder structure by themselves and place the synthesized manifests in the templates folder of the chart. With this structure, they can deploy the manifests to their Kubernetes cluster. Now, since a workaround already exists, if we proceed with implementing this RFC, this would take up developers time and effort and will add to maintenance load of cdk8s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Customers are not currently blocked for deploying to helm with our synthesized manifests. They would need to create the appropriate helm chart folder structure by themselves and place the synthesized manifests in the templates folder of the chart. With this structure, they can deploy the manifests to their Kubernetes cluster. Since a workaround already exists, if we proceed with implementing this RFC, this would take up developers time and effort and will add to maintenance load of cdk8s.
```

### What is the technical solution (design) of this feature?

We plan on adding a few new options to the `cdk8s synth` command:
* `--format`: Allows users to specify `helm` as a synthesis format. By default, this would be cdk8s, which means synthesis would take place as usual.
* `--chart-api-version`: This is the chart API version of the helm chart. The two possible values here are `v1` for Helm 2 and below, and `v2` for Helm 3. If not passed in by the user, it would default to `v2` API version. 
* `--chart-version`: This is the chart version that user wants for their helm chart. It follows the [SemVer 2](https://semver.org/) standard. This is *required* to be passed in by the user when synthesis format is helm. 

> For helm to consume our generated manifests for deployment, we would need to generate a structure similar to what [Helm Charts](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/) look like. The following is a simpler folder structure complying with helm structure. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For helm to consume our generated manifests for deployment, we would need to generate a structure similar to what [Helm Charts](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/) look like. The following is a sample folder structure complying with helm structure. 
```

# HELM CHART SYNTHESIS

* **Original Author(s):**: @vinayak-kukreja
* **Tracking Issue**: TODO:
* **API Bar Raiser**: @iliapolo

Users can now choose helm as a synthesis format for their generated manifests which would make it easier for them to deploy manifests using helm.

---

## Working Backwards
### README

**Synthesize CDK8s app to helm format**

You can generate manifest in a helm supported format which can then be used for deploying to Kubernetes cluster with helm. This can be done by using the `--format` flag set to `helm`. 

```
cdk8s synth --format helm --output ./chart
```

> **Note:**
This is only possible for CDK8s app right now and not CDK8s libraries since libraries are reusable components that defines constructs but CDK8s app contains initialization of these constructs with necessary inputs.

---

> 

Author: Would this mean that the user is not able to update to a newer version of the CDK8s library that would generate a new Helm Chart?

   - `<release-name>`: The release name for the helm deployment.
   - `./chart`: Is the folder here where we have the generated helm chart by CDK8s app.

_An example is worth a thousand words_. Let's go through a couple of user scenarios to understand more about the design being proposed.

**Synthesize CDK8s Apps into Helm Charts**

**Assumptions**
- The user is running synthesis with `--format helm` for a [CDK8s app and not a CDK8s library](##Appendix).

**User runs `cdk8s synth --format helm --output ./chart`** 

![](./images/helm-synthesis.png)

For helm to consume our generated manifests for deployment, we would need to generate a structure similar to what [Helm Charts](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/) look like. The following is a simpler folder structure complying with helm structure. The user can add more to it if they desire but this would work for our purpose.

```
chart/              # Value of --output. Defaults to directoryName if format is helm
├── Chart.yaml      # [REQUIRED] Information about your chart
├── Readme.md       # A generic readme conveying this chart is generated by CDK8s

> └── templates/      # The template files. These would contain the generated manifest files

Reviewer: Helm has a cool [feature for supporting CRDs](https://helm.sh/docs/chart_best_practices/custom_resource_definitions/). I think it would be really awesome to support that. Note that the way they support it is different in helm v3 vs helm v2. 

cdk8s could read the `imports` section of the config file, find the CRDs, and just place them in the `crds` directory.

```

* **If chart does not exists at --output destination**
    
    This structure would be created using [sscaff](https://github.com/cdklabs/node-sscaff) in the directory mentioned by `--output` flag. `sscaff` will allow us to copy an entire folder structure as suggested above, with capability of substituting keys and applying pre/post node.js hooks on it.

    Now, [Chart.yaml](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/#the-chart-yaml-file) is required to be part of the helm chart structure for a successful deployment. The following is how the templated `Chart.yaml` file would be,

    ```

>     apiVersion: v2                                      # [REQUIRED] The chart API version. v2 is for Helm 3 and v1 is for previous versions. 

Author: Yes, I think that would be better. Will update this.

    name: {{ library }}                                 # [REQUIRED] CDK8s library name. Defaults to current directory name.
    description: Generated chart for {{ library }}      # Description for the chart
    type: application                                   # The chart type can either be ‘application’ or ‘library’. Application charts can be deployed to Kubernetes.
    version: 0.1.0                                      # [REQUIRED] Chart version. Defaults to 0.1.0. Needs to be manually set/increased by user.

>     {{ app-version }}                                   # App version. Is not present by default.

Author: Yes, as we discussed `app-version` here would be removed and `version` would be passed in as a flag in the synth command by the user. Will add it to the RFC.

    ```

    Here, `{{ key }}` can be substituted with a value with the help of sscaff. We would have two scenarios in this case, running this command for,
    * **_A locally hosted CDK8s app_**
        
        Here, values for,
        * `{{ library }}` and `{{ app-version }}` is substituted from files that provide context about the project like `package.json` or `pyproject.toml`.
        * If these files are not present, the `{{ library }}` key would be substituted with name of the current folder and `{{ app-version }}` would not be set.
    
    * **_A remotely hosted CDK8s library_**
        
        Here, values for,

>         * `{{ library }}` is substituted from URL specified by user and `{{ app-version }}` is substituted from argument file that is passed in. If value for `{{ app-version }}` is not present, then the latest version of the library is used. Format for the argument file that would be passed in is as follows,

Author: Will add this to the `no code synthesis` RFC :)

**User runs `cdk8s synth --format helm`**

This command would execute successfully and will store the chart to the default location. 

For the default directory, since the directory name is suggested to be the chart name by [helm](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/#the-chart-file-structure). So, the `--output` value would be set to the default of library name(if no code synthesis) or directory name(if CDK8s app is local) if `--format` is helm, which is true in this scenario.

### Is this a breaking change?

This is not a breaking change. This is adding new functionality to the CDK8s CLI Synth command. 

### What alternative solutions did you consider?

* **`helm create` command to generate chart structure**

  [helm create](https://helm.sh/docs/helm/helm_create/) is a helm command that generates a templated chart with the necessary folder structure and files needed to deploy the chart with helm. I did not use this to create the chart structure for two reasons,
  1. This would mean that we need to take a dependency with helm or mention to the user that helm needs to be present on their machine for the synthesis to work in this scenario.

>   2. This command creates all the necessary structure but also creates files for simple `nginx` application. For our purposes, these files would either needed to be deleted or modified to work with the manifests we are generating. This feels like an over kill to accomplish our requirements.

Reviewer: Not that I think it would make a difference, but are you sure there is no way to create an empty chart?

* **[helm-x](https://github.com/mumoshu/helm-x) and [chartify](https://github.com/helmfile/chartify) libraries**
  

>   One of the functionality that these libraries provide users is to convert Kubernetes resource YAMLs to Helm Charts. These can be used to generate helm charts from our generated manifests from CDK8s app. Currently, these are version `0.x.x`, which means adding these to support our feature could result in added maintenance load for the team. I believe adding a solution of our own would give us more control and not limit us to a library's functionality.

Reviewer: I suppose another reason to reject is because it adds a dependency on a binary file, similar to `helm create`

### What are the drawbacks of this solution?

> * **Synthesis would result in overwriting existing manifests**

Reviewer: I would say this a drawback, its how the current `synth` command works and is an established contract between the tool and its users.

# HELM CHART SYNTHESIS

* **Original Author(s):**: @vinayak-kukreja

> * **Tracking Issue**: TODO:

Author: Will be creating issue for the RFC once internal review is done. Currently description links lead to nowhere.

* **API Bar Raiser**: @iliapolo

Users can now synthesize a cdk8s application into a helm chart. This will make it easier for them to deploy cdk8s applications using helm.

---

## Working Backwards
### README

**Synthesize cdk8s applications into helm charts**

You can synthesize your cdk8s application into a Helm chart, that can be directly passed to helm. This allows you to deploy cdk8s applications with Helm. To do so, pass `--format helm` to the synthesis command. 

```
cdk8s synth --format helm --chart-version 1.0.0
```

> **Note:**
* This is only possible for cdk8s app right now and not cdk8s libraries since libraries are reusable components that defines constructs but cdk8s app contains initialization of these constructs with necessary inputs.
* The Helm chart your cdk8s app synthesizes to would be missing `values.yaml` file. This is because the manifests will already contain all the values defined in the cdk8s app.
* The generated templates within the Helm chart are fully static. A limitation that this creates is that you won't be able to have multiple releases with this chart since there will be resource name collisions in the cluster.

> 

Author: How would this work?
```
If you need customization, you can do this within the cdk8s application (for example by explicitly reading a `values.yaml` file).
```

### Why should I use this feature?

You should use this feature if you'd like to deploy your cdk8s application using Helm.

---

## Internal FAQ

### Why are we doing this?

Helm is a renowned package manager for Kubernetes and is also popular among developers as a deployment tool. It eases the process of deploying to Kubernetes cluster for its users.

If a user currently have a cdk8s app, the process of deploying the generated manifests is complex. There is no functionality currently provided by cdk8s that helps with deploying the manifests. Currently the deployment process would look like the following for users cdk8s app,
1. User creates a repository hosting their cdk8s application. They can create the repository using `cdk8s init <project-type>` command and then add their custom code to it.
2. Then user builds and synthesizes their application using `cdk8s synth`. This generates manifests by default to the `dist` folder.
3. Now to deploy these to the user Kubernetes cluster, they would have to run,
   ```
    kubectl apply -f ./dist
   ```

Now, with the implementation of this feature, the user can run,
```

> cdk8s synth --format helm --chart-api-version v2 --chart-version 1.0.0 | helm install <release-name> ./dist

Author: No it is not required, it would default to `v2` which is the latest if not passed by the user.

**Chart.yaml and templates**

Now, [Chart.yaml](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/developing_charts/#the-chart-yaml-file) is required to be part of the helm chart structure for a successful deployment. The following is how the templated `Chart.yaml` file would be,

```
apiVersion: {{ api-version }}                       # [REQUIRED] The chart API version. v2 is for Helm 3 and v1 is for previous versions. 
name: {{ library }}                                 # [REQUIRED] cdk8s library name. Defaults to current directory name.
version: {{ version }}                              # [REQUIRED] Chart version.
description: Generated chart for {{ library }}      # Description for the chart
type: application                                   # The chart type can either be ‘application’ or ‘library’. Application charts can be deployed to Kubernetes.
```

Here, `{{ key }}` can be substituted with a value with the help of sscaff.    

> The values for,

Author: Sorry old habits, thank you for letting me know :)

    ```

The synthesis process would resume as normal after the substitution of keys is finished. And since format was `helm`, the template that is generated by synthesizing is placed in the `<--output value>/templates` folder. And the user can now run,

```
helm install <release-name> ./<--output value>
```

to deploy to their Kubernetes cluster.

**CRDs**

If the `apiVersion` mentioned is `v2` in `--chart-api-version`, that means the user is utilizing Helm V3. This version of helm provides users with a dedicated folder named `crds` to store the necessary CRDs. 
So, if the CRDs are mentioned in the `cdk8s.yaml` file in the user's cdk8s app, then those would be downloaded and added to the `crds` folder.

NOTE:
* We do not support CRDs functionality for Helm V2 or lower. To support CRDs in these versions Helm adds a custom hook [crd-install](https://v2.helm.sh/docs/charts_hooks/#defining-a-crd-with-the-crd-install-hook) as part of `annotations` in the CRD's yaml file. This would be complex to achieve on our end. 
    * We will delete the `crds` folder in this scenario using post sscaff hooks.

> * We cannot be aware of CRDs installed with `cdk8s import <crd>`. The CRD needs to be present in the [cdk8s.yaml](https://cdk8s.io/docs/latest/cli/import/#module-name) file for us to add it to the `crds` folder.

Author: Opened a feature request: https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s-cli/issues/886

    When cdk8s app generates manifests, the resource names remain the same with each synthesis. In helm, the resource names are prefixed with the release name. This helps deploying the same helm chart multiple times in the same namespace. This is not possible with cdk8s currently. 

* No customizability for generated helm chart

    In this solution, there is no way for us to maintain any information that user adds to the generated helm charts. We would be overwriting any changes to the chart if the synthesis is performed again. This is true for our current manifest synthesis too and is an established contract with the user. 

### What is the high-level project plan?

* **Support helm format**

   - Add support for 
        - `--format` flag and set default to cdk8s. 
        - `--chart-api-version` flag and set default to `v2`.
        - `--chart-version` flag and set as required when `--format` is set to helm. No defaults for this flag.
        - Set flags to [hide](https://github.com/yargs/yargs/pull/190) for now.
   - Create helm chart structure and template relevant files 
   - Download CRDs present in the cdk8s.yaml file
   - Synthesize application to helm chart structure

>    - Un-hide the flag

Reviewer: What you describe here is not a project plan, its essentially just a repeat of the technical implementation plan of the feature. This was already covered so not needed again.

Read through the [template instructions](https://github.com/cdk8s-team/cdk8s/blob/master/rfc/0000-template.md#what-is-the-high-level-project-plan) again. And see examples here:

- https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/blob/otaviom/rfc-0477/text/0477-policy-validation.md#what-is-the-high-level-project-plan
- https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/blob/huijbers/0201-refactoring-support/text/0201-refactoring-support.md#what-is-the-high-level-project-plan
- https://github.com/aws/aws-cdk-rfcs/blob/cdk-launchpads/text/0419-cdk-launchpads.md#what-is-the-high-level-project-plan

### Are there any open issues that need to be addressed later?

> * **Generated Manifest Diff**

Reviewer: What is the idea? are you thinking about a `cdk8s diff` command that would compare two directories on a file system? Not sure I understand why this is a concern of cdk8s. As you mention, diff can (and should) be done via normal version control. Note that the helm diff plugin you mention compares between a local chart, and the one **deployed** on the cluster, which cdk8s is not designed to do anyway.

Author: Ahh, I see. Yeah, I just wanted a way where user can know what changes are being introduced as a new synthesis command is run. Which can be done via version control.
